README.md, before:

# Task Manager API
This is my introductory project to Django, demonstrating how to build a RESTful API for managing tasks.

A Django-based API for managing tasks, allowing users to create, update, delete, and filter tasks. The API also tracks the history of task changes.

## Features

- Create, retrieve, update, and delete tasks.
- Filter tasks by status, name, and assigned user.
- Track task history.
- User registration.

## Technologies and Packages Used

- [Python 3.12.7](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3127/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)
- [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/download/)
- [Django REST Framework](https://www.django-rest-framework.org/)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
- [gunicorn](https://gunicorn.org/)
- [nginx](https://nginx.org/en/)
- [django-simple-history](https://django-simple-history.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- [django_filters](https://django-filter.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
- [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) for testing

## Installation
Ensure you have the following installed:

- [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

or

- [Python 3.12.7](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)
- [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/)
- [python3-virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html) (only required if you're not using [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/download/))

### Steps (with Docker Compose)

1. Clone repo
2. Inside the terminal repo run following command:
   ```
   docker compose build && docker compose up
   ```
   and wait for line `web-1  | Watching for file changes with StatReloader` to appear
   ![Screenshot from 2024-11-14 10-13-04](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c6105815-3316-4a52-96f7-b951205773da)
4. Open http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ or run cURL commands from terminal

### Steps (manual)

Setting up PSQL:
1. Open SQL shell (psql),
2. Log in as superuser
3. Setup initial database by running following commands in SQL shell (psql):
   ```
   CREATE USER task_admin WITH PASSWORD 'admin';
   CREATE DATABASE task_manager;
   ALTER USER task_admin CREATEDB;
   GRANT ALL ON SCHEMA public TO task_admin;
   GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE task_manager TO task_admin;
   ALTER DATABASE task_manager OWNER TO task_admin;
   ```
4. Later on you can delete traces of this repo by running following commands in psql:
   ```
   DROP DATABASE task_manager;
   REVOKE ALL ON SCHEMA public FROM task_admin;
   DROP USER task_admin;
   ```

Setting up project:
1. Clone repo
   1. Change directory to app folder `cd app/`
2. (If using PyCharm) Setup Python Interpreter and virtual environment
   1. Go to Settings -> Python Interpreter -> Add Interpreter -> Select Local Interpreter -> select installed python version 3.12.7
   2. Open new terminal in PyCharm, it will be using venv by default
3. (If not using Pycharm and setting up venv manually) Set up virtual environment
   1. In project directory run `virtualenv manual_venv --python=python3.12.7` which will create new virtual environment.
   2. Enter your venv with `source manual_venv/bin/activate`
4. In previously opened virtual environment terminal, install required packages:
   ```
   python -m pip install --upgrade pip
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
5. Make migrations and import provided initial data
   ```
   python manage.py makemigrations
   python manage.py migrate
   python manage.py loaddata tasks/fixtures/initial_data_with_history.json
   python manage.py collectstatic --noinput
   ```
6. Run the server with `python manage.py runserver`
to run it with built-in Django server or
   ```
   gunicorn --bind 0.0.0.0:8000 tasks_manager_project.wsgi:application
   ```
   to run it with gunicorn (gunicorn will show link as http://0.0.0.0:8000 but that's not what you need, you need one in next step)
7. Open http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ or run CURL commands from terminal

## Tests (manual installation only for now)
Testing is implemented using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) and can be done by running command `pytest` in your virtual environment
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/20170793-6230-46e1-9bfe-5c3b7a60ad92)


## Usage
You can interact with API using cURLs and/or browser

Tasks API Endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| GET  | /api/tasks/ | List all tasks |
| POST  | /api/tasks/ | Create a new task |
| GET  | /api/tasks/{id}/ | Get a task by ID |
| PUT  | /api/tasks/{id}/ | Update a task |
| DELETE  | /api/tasks/{id}/ | Delete a task |
| GET  | /api/tasks/{id}/history/ | Get the history of a task |

Users API Endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| GET  | /api/users/ | List all users |
| POST  | /api/users/ | Create a new user |
| GET  | /api/users/{id}/ | Get a user by ID |
| PUT  | /api/users/{id}/ | Update a user |
| DELETE  | /api/users/{id}/ | Delete a user |

### Examples:
> [!NOTE]
> When using CLI (command line interface), remember that you have to replace `"` with `\"` inside double quotes when sending json over so it's parsed corectly, as example:<br />
> `curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{"name": "CLI Task", "description": "Task created via curl", "status": "new"}"`<br />
> becomes<br />
> `curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"name\": \"CLI Task\", \"description\": \"Task created via curl\", \"status\": \"new\"}"`

Format:
```
curl

response
```
List of tasks:
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/

[{"id":1,"name":"Test Task 1","description":"Description here","status":"in_progress","assigned_user":1},{"id":2,"name":"Task 2","description":"Description 2","status":"new","assigned_user":1}]
```
Filter tasks with status "New"
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/?status=new

[{"id":2,"name":"Task 2","description":"Description 2","status":"new","assigned_user":1}]
```
Add new task
```
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"name\": \"CLI Task\", \"description\": \"Task created via curl\", \"status\": \"new\"}"

{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task created via curl","status":"new","assigned_user":null}
```
Edit a task
```
curl -X PUT http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/3/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"name\": \"CLI Task\", \"description\": \"Task edited via curl\", \"status\": \"in_progress\"}"

{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task edited via curl","status":"in_progress","assigned_user":null}
```
View history of a task
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/3/history/

[{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task edited via curl","status":"in_progress","assigned_user":null,"history_date":"2024-10-23T19:03:15.710752Z","history_type":"~"},{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task created via curl","status":"new","assigned_user":null,"history_date":"2024-10-23T18:55:42.357661Z","history_type":"+"}]
```
Add new user
```
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/users/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"username\": \"newuser\", \"password\": \"newpassword123\", \"email\": \"newuser@example.com\", \"first_name\": \"New\", \"last_name\": \"User\"}"

{"id":2,"username":"newuser","email":"newuser@example.com","first_name":"New","last_name":"User"}
```
List of users (assuming after adding new user with previous example):
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/users/

[{"id":1,"username":"TestUser","email":"example@gmail.com","first_name":"Test","last_name":"User"},{"id":2,"username":"newuser","email":"newuser@example.com","first_name":"New","last_name":"User"}]
```

All of this is also accessible via browser by opening http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ with the help of Django REST framework.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e88fcb57-8aeb-4ca9-8284-1aace18ce31f

## License
[MIT](https://github.com/MusicManiac/SimpleTaskManagerAPI/blob/master/LICENSE)

Commit message:

Added pytest to docker compose.

README.md, after:

# Task Manager API
This is my introductory project to Django, demonstrating how to build a RESTful API for managing tasks.

A Django-based API for managing tasks, allowing users to create, update, delete, and filter tasks. The API also tracks the history of task changes.

## Features

- Create, retrieve, update, and delete tasks.
- Filter tasks by status, name, and assigned user.
- Track task history.
- User registration.

## Technologies and Packages Used

- [Python 3.12.7](https://www.python.org/downloads/release/python-3127/)
- [Docker Compose](https://docs.docker.com/compose/)
- [Django](https://www.djangoproject.com/download/)
- [Django REST Framework](https://www.django-rest-framework.org/)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/)
- [gunicorn](https://gunicorn.org/)
- [nginx](https://nginx.org/en/)
- [django-simple-history](https://django-simple-history.readthedocs.io/en/latest/)
- [django_filters](https://django-filter.readthedocs.io/en/stable/)
- [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) for testing

## Installation
Ensure you have the following installed:

- [Docker Desktop](https://docs.docker.com/compose/install/)

or

- [Python 3.12.7](https://www.python.org/downloads/)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/)
- [pip](https://pip.pypa.io/en/stable/)
- [python3-virtualenv](https://virtualenv.pypa.io/en/latest/index.html) (only required if you're not using [PyCharm](https://www.jetbrains.com/pycharm/download/))

### Steps (with Docker Compose)

1. Clone repo
2. Inside the terminal repo run following command:
   ```
   docker compose build && docker compose up
   ```
   and wait for line `web-1  | Watching for file changes with StatReloader` to appear
   ![Screenshot from 2024-11-14 10-13-04](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/c6105815-3316-4a52-96f7-b951205773da)
4. Open http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ or run cURL commands from terminal

### Steps (manual)

Setting up PSQL:
1. Open SQL shell (psql),
2. Log in as superuser
3. Setup initial database by running following commands in SQL shell (psql):
   ```
   CREATE USER task_admin WITH PASSWORD 'admin';
   CREATE DATABASE task_manager;
   ALTER USER task_admin CREATEDB;
   GRANT ALL ON SCHEMA public TO task_admin;
   GRANT ALL PRIVILEGES ON DATABASE task_manager TO task_admin;
   ALTER DATABASE task_manager OWNER TO task_admin;
   ```
4. Later on you can delete traces of this repo by running following commands in psql:
   ```
   DROP DATABASE task_manager;
   REVOKE ALL ON SCHEMA public FROM task_admin;
   DROP USER task_admin;
   ```

Setting up project:
1. Clone repo
   1. Change directory to app folder `cd app/`
2. (If using PyCharm) Setup Python Interpreter and virtual environment
   1. Go to Settings -> Python Interpreter -> Add Interpreter -> Select Local Interpreter -> select installed python version 3.12.7
   2. Open new terminal in PyCharm, it will be using venv by default
3. (If not using Pycharm and setting up venv manually) Set up virtual environment
   1. In project directory run `virtualenv manual_venv --python=python3.12.7` which will create new virtual environment.
   2. Enter your venv with `source manual_venv/bin/activate`
4. In previously opened virtual environment terminal, install required packages:
   ```
   python -m pip install --upgrade pip
   pip install -r requirements.txt
   ```
5. Make migrations and import provided initial data
   ```
   python manage.py makemigrations
   python manage.py migrate
   python manage.py loaddata tasks/fixtures/initial_data_with_history.json
   python manage.py collectstatic --noinput
   ```
6. Run the server with `python manage.py runserver`
to run it with built-in Django server or
   ```
   gunicorn --bind 0.0.0.0:8000 tasks_manager_project.wsgi:application
   ```
   to run it with gunicorn (gunicorn will show link as http://0.0.0.0:8000 but that's not what you need, you need one in next step)
7. Open http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ or run CURL commands from terminal

## Tests
Testing is implemented using [pytest](https://docs.pytest.org/en/stable/) and can be done by running command `pytest` in your virtual environment.
If using docker installation they are run automatically before server start.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/20170793-6230-46e1-9bfe-5c3b7a60ad92)


## Usage
You can interact with API using cURLs and/or browser

Tasks API Endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| GET  | /api/tasks/ | List all tasks |
| POST  | /api/tasks/ | Create a new task |
| GET  | /api/tasks/{id}/ | Get a task by ID |
| PUT  | /api/tasks/{id}/ | Update a task |
| DELETE  | /api/tasks/{id}/ | Delete a task |
| GET  | /api/tasks/{id}/history/ | Get the history of a task |

Users API Endpoints

| Method | Endpoint | Description |
| ------------- | ------------- | ------------- |
| GET  | /api/users/ | List all users |
| POST  | /api/users/ | Create a new user |
| GET  | /api/users/{id}/ | Get a user by ID |
| PUT  | /api/users/{id}/ | Update a user |
| DELETE  | /api/users/{id}/ | Delete a user |

### Examples:
> [!NOTE]
> When using CLI (command line interface), remember that you have to replace `"` with `\"` inside double quotes when sending json over so it's parsed corectly, as example:<br />
> `curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{"name": "CLI Task", "description": "Task created via curl", "status": "new"}"`<br />
> becomes<br />
> `curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"name\": \"CLI Task\", \"description\": \"Task created via curl\", \"status\": \"new\"}"`

Format:
```
curl

response
```
List of tasks:
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/

[{"id":1,"name":"Test Task 1","description":"Description here","status":"in_progress","assigned_user":1},{"id":2,"name":"Task 2","description":"Description 2","status":"new","assigned_user":1}]
```
Filter tasks with status "New"
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/?status=new

[{"id":2,"name":"Task 2","description":"Description 2","status":"new","assigned_user":1}]
```
Add new task
```
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"name\": \"CLI Task\", \"description\": \"Task created via curl\", \"status\": \"new\"}"

{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task created via curl","status":"new","assigned_user":null}
```
Edit a task
```
curl -X PUT http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/3/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"name\": \"CLI Task\", \"description\": \"Task edited via curl\", \"status\": \"in_progress\"}"

{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task edited via curl","status":"in_progress","assigned_user":null}
```
View history of a task
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/tasks/3/history/

[{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task edited via curl","status":"in_progress","assigned_user":null,"history_date":"2024-10-23T19:03:15.710752Z","history_type":"~"},{"id":3,"name":"CLI Task","description":"Task created via curl","status":"new","assigned_user":null,"history_date":"2024-10-23T18:55:42.357661Z","history_type":"+"}]
```
Add new user
```
curl -X POST http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/users/ -H "Content-Type: application/json" -d "{\"username\": \"newuser\", \"password\": \"newpassword123\", \"email\": \"newuser@example.com\", \"first_name\": \"New\", \"last_name\": \"User\"}"

{"id":2,"username":"newuser","email":"newuser@example.com","first_name":"New","last_name":"User"}
```
List of users (assuming after adding new user with previous example):
```
curl -X GET http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/users/

[{"id":1,"username":"TestUser","email":"example@gmail.com","first_name":"Test","last_name":"User"},{"id":2,"username":"newuser","email":"newuser@example.com","first_name":"New","last_name":"User"}]
```

All of this is also accessible via browser by opening http://127.0.0.1:8000/api/ with the help of Django REST framework.

https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e88fcb57-8aeb-4ca9-8284-1aace18ce31f

## License
[MIT](https://github.com/MusicManiac/SimpleTaskManagerAPI/blob/master/LICENSE)
